# Baseball_Research
This repository includes projects and research done for baseball/softball related projects, including work done while I was a student, both in class and with relations to the Sports Analytics Club of St. Olaf College, as well as the work necessary to complete the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR) Certification courses, and other personal passion projects.

A description of each section and the files contained within each is contained below:

## Personal Work

#### Link to Shift Article

This document contains a link to an RPubs site that I created in the Spring of 2020 that, while technically was submitted as school work, is something I consider to be my first project that wasn't school or work related, as I was working on it previously and simply ended up submitting it for a final class project that semester. The article outlines the idea of defensive shifts in MLB, and why they aren't as responsible for the decline in offense we're seeing.

## SABR Certification Material

#### SABR Course 2

The final project to complete the level two SABR certification was a case study of whether or not the Padres should have signed Juan Soto to a contract extension prior to the 2023 MLB season. We were required to complete an analysis of who he is as a player, both currently and in the historical context of the game, come up with a future projection for how he would perform moving forward, create a contract projection to match the production projection, and then analyze how that contract would fit within the context of the Padres payroll situation, given the stipulation that the front office and ownership groups did not want to take on a ton of financial risk. However, we did have a lenght restriction, so I furthered my analysis in the SABR Course 2 Case Study - Extended document. Both the submitted Case Study and the Extended Case Study are provided in .docx and .pdf versions for ease of readability.

#### SABR Course 3

The final project to complete the level three SABR certification was to build a player projection system that would out-perform the MARCEL system developed by Tom Tango. This folder includes the data files used, the Google Colab notebook containing the R code, and a short write up explaining my new model. We were instructed to keep our write up to under 500 words, so I plan to further investigate my model in the future, as well as expland my analysis of how it works and why it's better than the MARCEL model.

## Sports Analytics Club

While at St. Olaf College, I was part of a group of students that founded our Sports Analytics Club. As part of the club, we were given the opportunity to work directly with our school's varsity softball team. These files are from that work, specifically from the 2019 season.

#### Data Cleaning

This file is an R script that we used to extract the necessary data from the play-by-play data that the team provided to us, as generated by iScore, the app that they use for their in game statistics tracking.

#### St Olaf Softball Data Visualizations

This document includes a number of data visializations for one of the players on the team (Player 1) that represent how their production statistics (Batting Average, OPS, wOBA, etc) change throughouth the season, and how the underlying process statistics (hard hit %, contact %, batted ball profiles, etc) affected those changes. The time frames are broken up into roughly 8 game intervals, meaning the first data point is the value after ~8 games, the second data point is after ~16 games, and so on.

#### Count and Pitch Type Analysis

This file contains a script that would take the outputs of our clean data files (created using the Data Cleaning script) and calculate specific statistics (Batting Average, On Base %, etc.) for individual players (batters and pitchers) by both pitch type and ball/strike count.


## School Work

#### Algorithm Selection

The files in this folder make up the final project for MSCS356: Algorithms for Decision Making. The goal of the final project was to explore all the different types of algorithms explored in the class, including: Linear Regression, Logistic Regression, KNN modeling, Boosting, Bagging, Decision Trees, Ridge Regression, and Lasso Regression, and determine which one created a more accurate predicion model for your topic. Not only did we focus on choosing the correct algorithm, we also focused on topics like feature selection and parameter hypertuning. Our group chose to explore building a MLB game prediction algorithm. Unfortunately, examining the algorithm itself and how it works was not within the scope of the project - only determinging which algorithm was the best. I plan to dive back into this in the future to focus more on the model itself, how it works, where it's missing, and how to make it more accurate.

#### Bayesian Home Run Analysis

As part of my STAT322: Statistical Theory final, we were tasked with choosing a statistical research paper and writing a summary, as well as giving a presentation to the class about the contents of the paper. This is my summary of "“Predicting Home Run Production in Major League Baseball Using a Bayesian Semiparametric Model”, by Gilbert W. Fellingham and Jared D. Fisher. As the title suggests, Fellingham and Fisher want to use Bayesian Statistics to predict future home run production, as opposed to traditional Frequentist theories. However, in baseball, there is no clear, definitive prior probability distribution for
anything, which is an obvious issue with Bayesian Statistics. They solve this problem by building a non-parametric prior distribution that can be used in their Bayesian analysis. The summary essay goes into more detail.
